README.md, before:

# GTSAM Experiments for the paper Sparse Variable Projection in Robotic Perception: Exploiting Separable Structure for Efficient Nonlinear Optimization

This is the code for the gtsam experiments in the paper Sparse Variable Projection in Robotic Perception: Exploiting SeparableStructure for Efficient Nonlinear Optimization by Alan Papalia, Nikolas Sanderson, Haoyu Han, Heng Yang, Hanumant Singh, and Michael Everett. For the rest of the experiments please see ___. 

You can find the paper:

Please cite us:

## Install

The C++ implementation can be built and exported as a CMake project.

#### C++ quick installation guide

The following installation instructions have been verified on Ubuntu 22.04:

*Step 1:*  Install dependencies

```
sudo apt-get install liblapack-dev libblas-dev libsuitesparse-dev
```
[Eigen](https://eigen.tuxfamily.org/index.php?title=Main_Page)  (Make sure using the same version o external as GTSAM's to avoid conflicts, i.e., you can enable `-DGTSAM_USE_SYSTEM_EIGEN=ON` when compile GTSAM)

[GTSAM](https://github.com/borglab/gtsam) (tested on release/[4.3a0](https://github.com/borglab/gtsam/releases/tag/4.3a0), should also compatible with a series of versions that after **Boost Removal**, we use OptionalMatrixType but not boost optional matrix for customer factors)

(If you have multiple GTSAM versions in your machine, and do not want to destroy the environment. The easiest thing to do may be just specify the path to your GTSAM compatible with our project by :

```
set(GTSAM_DIR "path to your /gtsam/build")
set(GTSAM_UNSTABLE_DIR "path to your /gtsam/build")
## Above your find_package(GTSAM REQUIRED) and :
set(GTSAMCMakeTools_DIR "path to your /gtsam/cmake")
## Above your find_package(GTSAMCMakeTools REQUIRED)
```

)

To run the experiments:
```bash
git clone git@github.com:PandaHood/varProj-gtsam.git
cd varProj-gtsam 
mkdir cmake-build-default
cd cmake-build-default
cmake ..
make -j
```

You can then run the bash scripts inside the data folders (Provided you have added the data).

```
./data/raslam/run_raslam.sh
./data/sfm/run_sfm.sh
./data/snl/run_snl.sh
```

Commit message:

Citation info in README
Updated README to include author links, collaboration details, paper citation, and repository link.

README.md, after:

# GTSAM Experiments for the paper Sparse Variable Projection in Robotic Perception: Exploiting Separable Structure for Efficient Nonlinear Optimization

This is the code for the gtsam experiments in the paper Sparse Variable Projection in Robotic Perception: Exploiting SeparableStructure for Efficient Nonlinear Optimization by [Alan Papalia](https://alanpapalia.github.io/), [Nikolas Sanderson](https://pandahood.github.io/NikolasSanderson.github.io/), Haoyu Han, [Heng Yang](https://hankyang.seas.harvard.edu/), Hanumant Singh, and [Michael Everett](https://mfe7.github.io/). This was done in collaboration with UMich's [Robotic Exploration Lab](https://robex.engin.umich.edu/), Northeastern Field Robotics Group, [Northeastern Autonomy and Intelligence Labratory](https://neu-autonomy.github.io/lab_website/), and Harvard's [Computational Robotics Group](https://computationalrobotics.seas.harvard.edu/). For the rest of the experiments please see this [repository](https://github.com/UMich-RobotExploration/variable-projection).

You can find the paper [here](https://arxiv.org/abs/2512.07969)


If you use this work in your research, please cite:

```bibtex
@misc{papalia2025sparsevariableprojectionrobotic,
      title        = {Sparse Variable Projection in Robotic Perception: Exploiting Separable Structure for Efficient Nonlinear Optimization},
      author       = {Alan Papalia and Nikolas Sanderson and Haoyu Han and Heng Yang and Hanumant Singh and Michael Everett},
      year         = {2025},
      eprint       = {2512.07969},
      archivePrefix= {arXiv},
      primaryClass = {cs.RO},
      url          = {https://arxiv.org/abs/2512.07969},
}
```

## Install

The C++ implementation can be built and exported as a CMake project.

#### C++ quick installation guide

The following installation instructions have been verified on Ubuntu 22.04:

*Step 1:*  Install dependencies

```
sudo apt-get install liblapack-dev libblas-dev libsuitesparse-dev
```
[Eigen](https://eigen.tuxfamily.org/index.php?title=Main_Page)  (Make sure using the same version o external as GTSAM's to avoid conflicts, i.e., you can enable `-DGTSAM_USE_SYSTEM_EIGEN=ON` when compile GTSAM)

[GTSAM](https://github.com/borglab/gtsam) (tested on release/[4.3a0](https://github.com/borglab/gtsam/releases/tag/4.3a0), should also compatible with a series of versions that after **Boost Removal**, we use OptionalMatrixType but not boost optional matrix for customer factors)

(If you have multiple GTSAM versions in your machine, and do not want to destroy the environment. The easiest thing to do may be just specify the path to your GTSAM compatible with our project by :

```
set(GTSAM_DIR "path to your /gtsam/build")
set(GTSAM_UNSTABLE_DIR "path to your /gtsam/build")
## Above your find_package(GTSAM REQUIRED) and :
set(GTSAMCMakeTools_DIR "path to your /gtsam/cmake")
## Above your find_package(GTSAMCMakeTools REQUIRED)
```

)

To run the experiments:
```bash
git clone git@github.com:PandaHood/varProj-gtsam.git
cd varProj-gtsam 
mkdir cmake-build-default
cd cmake-build-default
cmake ..
make -j
```

You can then run the bash scripts inside the data folders (Provided you have added the data).

```
./data/raslam/run_raslam.sh
./data/sfm/run_sfm.sh
./data/snl/run_snl.sh
```
